v4 concepts: erc6909 (#745)
Uniswap/docs: docs/contracts/v4/concepts/03-erc6909.mdx

title: ERC-6909
---

Uniswap v4 uses [ERC-6909](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-6909) to further improve gas-efficiency on token claims and redemptions.

> ERC-6909 is a simple multi-token contract standard. Think of it as a way to manage multiple ERC-20 tokens from a single smart contract - which improves upon ERC-1155's design by actually simplifying it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ERC-6909 is a simple multi-token contract standard. The token standard is analogous to managing multiple ERC-20 tokens from a single smart contract - similar to ERC-1155. The major difference between ERC-6909 vs. ERC-1155 is granular approvals and the removal of inefficient safe transfer callbacks.
```

# How it works

> Instead of choosing to move tokens in/out of the `PoolManager` every time users want to conduct swaps, they can choose to leave their tokens with the `PoolManager`. In exchange, the `PoolManager` **mints them an ERC-6909 token representing their claim** - the tokens they have deposited into the `PoolManager`. In future swaps, users will not need to transfer tokens out of their wallet into the `PoolManager` - the `PoolManager` can simply **burn some (or all) of their claim tokens they have, and mint new claim tokens representing the output of the swap**.

Reviewer: ERC-6909 can used in liquidity modifications and donations too, lets not restrict it to swaps
```suggestion
Instead of choosing to move tokens in/out of the `PoolManager`, developers can opt-in and leave the ERC-20 tokens within the `PoolManager`. In exchange, the `PoolManager` can **mint them an ERC-6909 token representing their claim**. In subsequent interactions requiring _paying_ tokens, users will not need to transfer ERC-20 tokens into the `PoolManager` - users can simply _burn_ some (or all) of their claim tokens they have
```

> Intuitively it may feel like this isn't much better since we're still minting/burning tokens - but that's not the point. 

Reviewer: hmm dont think this is really needed
```suggestion
```

> **Doing "real" ERC-20 token transfers would require calling functions on external smart contracts**. This presents the first gas overhead - external function calls. Secondly, these external smart contracts can have their own **custom logic within their transfer functions** - for example USDC has a blacklist it needs to check against before letting a transfer happen - which is a further gas overhead. Minting and burning ERC-6909 tokens therefore ends up being cheaper because it doesn't require external function calls and also has a **constant size gas overhead regardless of which underlying token is being represented by the claim token**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Doing _real_ ERC-20 token transfers requires calls to external smart contracts - incurring gas overhead compared to internal accounting. Secondly, these external smart contracts have their own custom logic within their transfer functions - for example USDC's blocked-address list - which is a further gas overhead. Thus, minting and burning ERC-6909 tokens are more gas-efficient because they don't require external function calls and have a constant-size gas overhead regardless of the underlying ERC-20 token.
```

This mechanism therefore helps further reduce gas costs. All these gas cost reductions overall make pools much more competitive based on the fees they charge.

# Examples

## High-frequency traders / MEV bots

> These users are often conducting a lot of swaps in relatively short durations of time. ERC-6909 will benefit them from executing their trading strategy in a much more gas-efficient way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These users are often conducting a lot of swaps in relatively short durations of time, while staying within the Uniswap Protocol. These power-users can trade using ERC-6909 tokens for improved gas-efficiency.
```

> ## Daily users
> 
> Normal users could also benefit from such mechanism for example if they want to DCA on UNI for a month, they can let the `PoolManager` keep the actual UNI during the DCA and just use the ERC-6909 token to claim back all their UNI a month later to save a considerable amount of gas.

Reviewer: I like this idea a lot, but ERC-6909 are reserved for power users, so lets mention liquidity rebalancing
```suggestion
## Liquidity management

ERC-6909 does not only benefit swappers. For power-users that may be opening and closing liquidity positions frequently, liquidity managers can opt-in and receive their capital as ERC-6909. 
```

Author: Oh right rebalancing is a very good point
